---
layout: post
title: "Strategising for Big N Interviews"
date: 2019-07-08
---

It's been a while since I've posted as I've been pretty absorbed in my internship. I've made another [post](2019/07/01/finding-lines-and-circles-in-images.html) going into a topic close to what I'm working on there. However, another topic that has been engaging me lately is how to strategise for so called 'Big N' Interviews. There's a finite amount of time before I have to submit an application and attend these interviews, and last year - after attending internship interviews at Amazon, Apple and Facebook I pretty much bombed all of them. This wasn't so bad, as it was sort of like a practice round, and the key thing I learned from this experience is that these interviews can be studied for. I still think it would be a great experience to work in a big internet company so early in my career, so I am going to have another go - but this time prepare much smarter than I did before.

In order to do this, I'm going to draw on the sole other experience I've had of something similar. During my final years of school I was doing well, but not spectaculary well by any means. I had barely acknowledged the need for good grades, as I felt that they would just come without much effort. As a result in my penultimate years exams, which in the UK are needed for university applications, were good, but not great - I got AAC in Maths, Physics and History, which meant that a lot of courses (which required at least AAA) were not an option for me any more, especially at better universities in the UK. My approach to studying was way off, I would flip through the textbook a few days before the exam and read over some old solutions. I barely understood what was being examined, and just sort of 'guessed' on the day. Realising that this wouldn't work anymore was a big shock. So in my final year, aware of the finite amount of time available, I knuckled down. It was a risky strategy, starting from the beginning - I remember having to teach myself things from previous years which I'd just glossed over again, despite there being much harder stuff to tackle from this years content, but I was convinced that if I understood the basic stuff properly the rest would come easily. I turned out to be right, and left school with 4A\*'s, which are the highest grades you can get.

I'm going to have to take a similar approach to preparing for these interviews. In terms of CS, I'm pretty bare bones in terms of computer architecture, and how things like compilers and networks work. I don't fully understand how floating point operations are carried out on real hardware, and how different parts of a computer come together to form a coherent structure, that can do stuff! I know of many algorithms and most common datastructures, but I'm not hugely comfortable whiteboarding. So, despite the various online guides for 'how to prepare for interview X', I'm going to sort of ignore them and prepare a list of topics for myself. There are 3 big questions I want to spend the next year or so, before I interview for full time roles, that I want to be in a position to answer.

## 1) How are algorithms translated into electrical signals, and back?

This will cover topics in computer architecture, compiler theory, as well as how algorithms are processed by hardware. I think this is probably the biggest gap in my knowledge, and though it isn't stricly neccessary by most people's accounts of sitting these interviews. I personally think that a solid understanding of these topics will make everything else much easier to digest.

## 2) How does the internet work?

This will cover the basics of networking protocols, and how communication happens on both a hardware and network level. I have a vague notion of this just from software development experience, but not understanding this is a big blocker for me. It will make understanding cloud technologies, as well as how things within unix (which is organised in terms of network communication) mean.

## 3) How do you break down an unfamiliar problem into a solution?

Whiteboarding is unfortunately compulsory, but the only reason people fear it is because of their lack of knowledge. Answering this question will force me to understand all the basic algorithms and datastructures like the back of my hand, and be able to deploy them at will. This is much more useful than mindlessly chugging away at Leetcode - though that will be a part of it.